---
title: It's alive! IT'S ALIVE!
category: journal
layout: default
---

Hello, world. I'm Max, and I've been filling notebooks with my thoughts since before I even knew the word "journal".

Of course, there's a not-insignificant difference between filling up a private notebook with private thoughts and posting lengthy diatribes on the internet, attached in one way or another to your real name, for all to see. But I've been doing the latter for almost as long as I've been doing the former.

It might surprise you, then, that I didn't have a blog until fairly recently. It certainly surprises me. After all, it's not like I hadn't _considered_ setting up a blog until pretty recently – I actually experimented with blogging about my projects, albeit under an assumed name, all the way back in middle school.

But until recently, there'd always been something holding me back from blogging – a factor other than the public/private dichotomy that separated blogging from journaling. And, until recently, I didn't even know what that factor _was_.

Set in stone
----------------

Blog posts, the conventional wisdom goes, are static. Upon publication, each post is immediately filed away in an Archive for all eternity (or, at least, until it's lost in the inevitable shuffle of Personal Website Redesign #17.) A blog _is_ an archive – a stack of old periodicals in the library basement, each bearing little more than historical significance once its publication date has passed.

A blog's author might return to a published post a few days later to clarify some language, fix a typo, or (should the post _really_ get passed around) append some follow-up material addressing questions, comments, and rebuttals by other bloggers. But the revisions and follow-ups are always tacked on. It's considered good practice to clearly demarcate where the original post ends and the corrections begin; likewise, it's considered good practice to publish an extensive follow-up piece as a separate post entirely.

Each page in my written journal, while still a time capsule or archive in its own right, was something besides that: a living document, host to countless revisions and rehashings of the same few concepts. I would write in my journal of the moment just to get my thoughts out on paper; if, in the process, those thoughts evolved (as they so often do), I could simply turn to a new page and begin again. Heck, if I didn't feel like doing that, I could just scratch out my lousy first draft (what was the Max Kreminski of five minutes ago _thinking_?!) and jot down my slightly-less-lousy second draft in the next margin over.

I was putting off starting a blog because I didn't want to set my thoughts in stone. Rather, I wanted a semi-public journal – a place for me to document my thinking of the moment, but also to replace what I'd written in the past with a new chunk of words when my thoughts on some subject or another evolved.

Not your usual blog
----------------

This part of my site, then, won't be a blog in the conventional sense. I intend to run it more like a wiki that only I'm allowed to edit. I'm not entirely certain if the software I'm using as a foundation ([Jekyll](http://jekyllrb.com), mostly because it integrates more or less seamlessly with GitHub Pages) will be conducive to that model, but I figure it's worth a try.

As I add more posts, I'll revisit those that I've written in the past and add links to newer content on the same subjects. I might make a post about a project of mine that's heavily WIP, only to come back to it after a week or two of work and completely change half the stuff I've written. Basically, I fully intend to edit everything I post here – none of it is set in stone.

Granted, there's a definite advantage to treating your blog like an archive: you rarely, if ever, have to look back at past posts and make sure that the stuff you've written there is still current. Over time, it might turn out that the burden of revising what I wrote months or years ago to jibe with current views is too great, and my journal will regress back to a static blog like any other.

But, if the day ever comes when I decide to scrap the concept of a "living blog", I'll at least be comfortable returning to this post and editing it one last time.

(Did you hear that? It sounds like... freedom.)
